Let's say there's another issue that we have we can't contend with and
one of those might be
Well imagine that in order for society to progress you have to allow the individual to compete in a relatively untrammeled space
So that they can innovate and then imagine that one of the consequences of that innovation is that you get these pareto
distributions developing because the innovator or
The one who's second in line to the innovator whatever ends up with them with the bulk of the spoils?
So you might say there's a cost to be paid in inequality
for innovation and
Then you could also say well too much inequality
destabilizes things which seems to be quite quite clear
So there's room for an intelligent conversation about that right because the lefties say Oh too much inequality
And they need to be listened to because the evidence is quite clear if you let the inequality ramp up enough the whole system
Destabilizes because the people at the bottom think fuck it. We'll just
We'll just flip the system upside down right no one wants that like right-wing conservatives
don't want that so because you could make a Republican argument say don't let the
Inequality in your neighborhood get out of hand because the crime rate will skyrocket and the empirical evidence on that is overwhelmingly strong
inequality drives crime
Now you can say you can argue about why but the fact that it does is that's not disputable
So we could have an intelligent discussion between the left and the right and the discussion would go something like this
You need innovation you pay for innovation with inequality, but you need to bind inequality because if it's too intense then things destabilize
It's like okay. We could agree on that
We've got the parameters set
now we have to now we have to start thinking very carefully through how to do the redistribution issue and we don't know how to
Do that so you might say well
We have a guaranteed annual income for people which I think is a horrible solution by the way
But it addresses the right problem the problem is is that we're hyper productive
But the spoils go to those at the top and some of those resources need to be funneled down to the people who have zero
so that they have an
opportunity to at least get to the point where they can innovate and so the bloody whole bloody thing doesn't wobble and fall and
We could we and I would say in some sense. That's what the political discussion is about but we
We've skittered off into these radical
oversimplifications, which something like well if if you have more than another person you're an oppressor and you're evil and if you have less
It's because you're virtuous and victimized and that's just a non-starter
So you think that there's a real problem with like something like a universal basic income
Well I think the idea that the solution is a basic income is not a good idea because I think the problem is deeper than
That I don't think the fundamental problem is that people don't have enough money.
I think the fundamental problem
Is that human beings in some sense are beasts of burden
And if they're not given if they're not provided with a place where they can accept social
responsibility social and individual responsibility in an honourable manner they degenerate and die
But that's the opiate crisis in West right now like men need
Men, who are men, don't need money
They need function and we've got a problem one of the problems is for example here. Here's an ugly stat
I think I told you this once before
it's illegal to induct anyone into the Armed Forces if they have an IQ of less than 83 and
The reason for that is the the Armed Forces
despite having every reason to draw the
contradictory
conclusion
Has decided that there isn't a single thing that you can be trained to do in the military if you have an IQ of less
Than 83 that isn't positively counterproductive
that's 10% of the population and we're producing a
Culture that's very cognitively complex
Like what the hell are you going to do if you can't use a computer?
Like if you can use a computer you're at least in the game if you can really use one you're hyper powerful if you're not
Literate enough to use a computer you're at zero
Ten percent of the population the Conservatives say well, there's a job for everyone if they just worked hard enough. It's like
No and increasingly no and the Liberals say well, everyone's basically the same you can train anyone to do anything
It's like no you can't yeah
I want to go back to the inequality point here because if you look at this biologically actually I think it reveals a lot
Why are we I mean we know from from careful study that people are
motivated by the degree of inequality more than they are the
The absolute level of well-being that they have and there's a very good
It's tragic but a very good evolutionary reason for this which is if you are
Working on some piece of land and your neighbor has the adjacent piece of land
And they're doing twice as well as you it's because they know something you don't
right and so becoming focused on what they're doing that you're not doing is a
Rational thing to spend your time on so you can figure out what it is that they know that you don't in the modern environment
This is a catastrophe
Because who are your neighbors well
You've got some box sitting on the wall of your living room that has a totally artificial portrait of other people who may be much
Wealthier than you and it's broadcasting in as if you're looking in their window right in the adjacent house
And so you think you you being triggered to
think that you're doing something wrong that you might fix when in fact the solution may not be
First of all the person on the other side of that screen may not be for real
But even if they are they're not living in the same environment to see you the technology is interfacing with with our brains
badly
But so we have the perception of massive inequality
economically we do have massive inequality you're arguing that the solution to this involves some sort of
massive redistribution
But nonetheless
redistribution is wildly unpopular for various reasons, and so what we've got now is a
situation
This is speculative
But what's really happening is that austerity is being used as a threat to keep people who would otherwise?
rebel against the inequality in line and
My fear about this is that this is exactly the conditions that are going to trigger that?
Tribal
population against population mayhem that we were talking about at the beginning of this conversation that when people have the sense that the
the bursts of growth that they were
experiencing is now over the natural response is to turn on those who are not as powerful and take their stuff that this is a
totally indefensible, but nonetheless
biological pattern of history and that if we want to avoid that
We have to stop sending the signals that trigger us to imagine that we've just run
to the limit of the
Opportunity that we had discovered and it is now time to look and see who can't defend their positions
How are we sending these signals?
Well by
Basically
failing to provide enough well being that people's perception of the
Inequality is reduced to a tolerable level
Well the argument for universal basic income
certainly certainly a strong one
And I you know it's also an it's also a good argument for equality of opportunity right because people are people are actually not as
Resentful about the success of others as you might expect
They're resentful about it if they feel that the game is fixed (hmm)
But they're also willing to consider the game long term so lots of people will say look like I'm stuck in not zero
I'm stuck at one but my kids might make it to four and that's good enough
And that's been the American dream right and that's and that's a really high power
Antidote to inequality, it's like well. Yeah, there's some inequality
We need it to keep the generative mechanism going, but the game is fair, and you can play it, too
And there's some reasonable probability that either you or someone you love will be successful so
That so it has to be a straight game
And that's why ethics is so important to keep this landscape stable people can't play crooked games and the rich shouldn't be fixing the game
If they want to hold on to their money and the problem is is that
some of them
Although not all some of them are fixing the game
and no one's happy about that and no wonder you know and and I
guess that was evidenced to some degree by the 2008 collapse because it seemed and
And I'm just as uninformed as the next person, so I'm I'm what I'm capable of commenting on this it seems from the outside
That the rich
Disproportionately benefited from the restabilization of the economic system and people are not happy about that
And they shouldn't be happy about that because it indicates that there's something fundamentally rotten about the game, so you could say well
Maybe people can tolerate
necessary
inequality if the game isn't rigged and
So that's why everybody has to act in a manner that indicates that the game isn't rigged and that means they can't rig it
That's really what it means
so and so we're also being driven into this inequality corner by I would say by the post modernists and the
neo-marxists because they say this is the pernicious thing they say well the reason that some people have more than others is because
Every hierarchy is based on arbitrary power
and they're all oppressors and the reason they have the money is because they stole it from you and
There's some truth in that because there are some criminals
But when you get to the point where you fail to distinguish the productive people from the criminals
Which is exactly what happened in the 1920s in the Soviet Union you better bloody well watch out because when you radically
Make things egalitarian you're gonna
Wipe out all your productive people and then you're gonna starve and so that's that's one of the doomed
End scenarios that awaits us if this idiot process of polarization continues and what I find reprehensible about the universities
And you're tangled up right up to your neck in this is that the universities are
actively agitating to produce people who believe that all inequality is due to oppression and power and
That's just well first of all it's technically wrong, but it's dangerous
Why is that so you guys both operate in that system?
So well
Here's the problem
No as far as I know nobody has properly studied the question of what fraction of the economy is actually
crooked rent-seeking right not productive
And I fear that the answer to that question is that it's an awful large fraction of the economy, not because of some
Conspiracy but because
Opportunity is finite
But con games aren't and so anybody who can find a mechanism for transferring wealth from somebody else for doing nothing
Finds that mechanism and that thing is is ever-present. Where as discovering the next big thing
that's actually productive is you know something that goes along and fits and starts and so if we were I
Mean really you've described it very well. We've got a
battle between two
Caricatures of what's true right are the either the market is wonderful and its produced great stuff with very little
corruption or
Everything that makes people unequal is the result of corruption both of these things are wrong, right?
markets are
Marvelous engines for figuring out how to do something really well
They're brilliant at this right and so people who see that fall in love with it understandably because they're so good at it
But what they're terrible at is telling you what you should want or what you should do right if people tell markets
Here's what we would like to accomplish, and then the markets tell us well
How do we accomplish that best that would be a very viable?
System that would not result in massive
rent-seeking
Resulting in everybody feeling that all of their misfortunes are the result of a rigged game
Which is so massively rigged that when they check they see yes, that is actually a large large to large extent what we're suffering from
But they want to throw the baby out with the bathwater and so they want to throw out markets entirely which you know it would
Be a terrible mistake
It's a it's a
You asked you why this has happened in the universities and like that I think it's one of these runaway positive feedback processes
You know the universities start to tilt hard to the left in the 60s and that just went out of control
And now we're at the point where
that's the dominant force and
Why is probably another manifestation of one of these pareto principles? It was like well at some point there's enough left
He's hired so that the probability that they're only going to hire people equally as left or greater starts to reach 100%
And then you iterate that across a couple of generations, and you get no conservatives
Which is more or less the situation say in the humanities and most of the social sciences and it sort of looks like a conspiracy
But it doesn't mean that anyone is actually planning it although. There are conscious attempts also to silence conservative voices
Let's say and then that's also driven by this postmodern ethos
No neo-marxist ethos. I would say that says that all of the right the moral right is on the side of the left
You know and so it's the combination of those two things there's more things. I think I often often think comically that if you paid
sociology professors
Three times as much the probability that they would be anti-capitalist would decline
Precipitously like I think a lot of it's driven because there's a lot of smart people in academia, and they're underpaid relative to their intelligence
Mmm, so and that doesn't make them happy so they get bitter and resentful about that and they think well there's these goddamn bankers who
Are hauling in twenty million dollars a year and Here I am
Hardly struggling, but here I am struggling comparatively
And that's the issue is comparatively on a hundred thousand dollars a year one hundred and twenty thousand dollars a year
You know I look at that, and I think well whatever
It doesn't matter, but there's a like my colleagues are often angry with me because I do work with the business school
You know and I also have a business are not
anti-capitalist in the least
But I it's just dumbfounding to me because they'll come up to me and say well
Are you so sure that you should be working with the business school, and I think what bloody planet?
Are you from too positive question like that's all businessmen are evil it's like really
That's the level of your sophistication.
This is really an argument, that's been presented to you that businessmen are evil?
well
they don't come out and say that but they certainly question my
Motivations for example in in in forming ties with the business school like what do they say about it?
They say exactly that they questioned my ethics about forming ties with the business school
So anyway they don't give you any reasons?
You're supposed to the reason supposed to be self-evident joke
You know, so let's give this argument. It's due I mean
I don't buy this argument, but but nonetheless let's let's not let's not caricature. Yes, that's good
In an absolutely free market, which is not what we have
But we have something that tends in that direction in an absolutely free market if you compete two
individuals one of whom is
completely amoral will embrace any
Opportunity if it makes a profit no matter what it is and the other individual has some limit to what they will do
Well, then there's no question who wins if we give this experiment long enough period the individual who will do anything will out-compete
the individual with moral limits because
Depend on what the game is though because no people find out that you have no moral limits then they're going to
Remove themselves from your market
Unfortunately not and no here's the I know it seems like that and in any given round
That's true. Okay, but to the extent that what you're saying is to the extent that people police
Their purchasing and they will you know they will stop using uber if uber is ethically
compromised for example
Well, then the point is well
What's the game the game is to figure out?
Which things are being monitored and not do any of the unethical things that are being monitored
But to do all of the unethical things that aren't being monitored and so the individual who is perceiving
Which things they can get away with has an advantage that's and a psychopath advantage well
I don't even want to call it the psychopath advantage right what this is is that a market will
Train you to do this if it is unregulated and the best that the ethically that the ethically
restrained person can do is
Compete dead even they have no way of getting ahead because the person that is completely free the the amoral
Business actor has the ability to do anything that the constrained actor has
Does this depend entirely upon what the battlefield is?
not really there's there's sort of one exception and that exception is people who have done something
that
Has suddenly put them in a powerful position right so
Tech people
Right, tech people who have skyrocketed as a result of having innovated the next big thing have not been through
the markets training them to discover the the
Landscape of what isn't being monitored that you can make a profit
That's one of the fascinating things about tech people in general is that these gigantic tech corporations almost all lean left
Well the gigantic tech corporations lean left. That's true on the other hand I mean I
Hate to say it, but think about how Google started right don't don't be evil right
I think they actually meant that right right and the thing is don't be evil is what it sounds like when you haven't been trained
By the market to have to do whatever you have to do to beat your competition
You've just come up with the great circuit engine and suddenly you're on top of the world
But over time what happens
That entity is now exposed competition from a bunch of other entities that
Increasingly will find an advantage in being freer to do
ethicly questionable stuff and so what it does is it forces an
Entity like Google to evolve in the direction of a morality, so now don't kind of handle with China Google
Yeah, Google wanted to expand into China
And so you know they had to make a deal with the devil so to speak right and they had except censorship
They will find ways to rationalize everything because to not
Rationalize that which their competitors can avail themselves of would be to perish and issues was there was all sorts of fake
Google going on just like they have fake Apple stores in China
They don't have the same sort of copyright laws that we have and you can essentially
Plagiarize anything you want on Brett you you also said that I shouldn't make a straw man of the anti-business
Argument of my peers and there's another way that
I shouldn't make a straw man of it like despite the fact that I'm not anti-capitalist
I don't believe that every entity is a business either and one of the things that has happened to universities that has actually they
pathologized in a number of dimensions, but they've also pathologized along the business dimension as the
Administrators have become increasingly trained or drawn from the ranks of business managers because a university is actually not a business
It's a like a church isn't a business there are?
organizations that aren't businesses that you can't just cram into the free market structure willy-nilly and so my colleagues also object to the
To the transformation of the university into a business entity run by profit seeking MBAs
and they should object to that because that's not what the
institution is for so there are reasons for them to be skeptical say of my association with the business school that aren't merely a
Reflection of a simplistic anti-capitalist ideology. Oh there are lots of there are lots of things that are not
They have no immunity to contact with the market right what has happened to the university system
Is that markets have pushed it in all kinds of directions that are not healthy for the mission of the Academy
And this is also true
You know journalism isn't well done in a market either, right?
Journalism done in the market ends up telling you what you want to hear not what you need to know
so anyway
Markets are wonderful, but there's certain things
They shouldn't be allowed to touch and there are certain things that they shouldn't do like tell us what to want right?
They're not there's no magic principle by which a market knows
What's healthy, and what you know you might crayon sir, then well that also then brings us back to another part of the conservative
Liberal left dilemma, which is well you know
To direct the market means to impose the heavy hand of the state and its potential
pathologies on the market but to leave it alone completely means that it
Wanders randomly through through an indeterminate landscape, and and I guess part of the issue there, too is it's sort of like
Well, how do we how do we?
How do we properly balance for foresight and planning which you'd think would have some role in in the construction of large-scale states
It's like well. What do we want the landscape to look like how do we balance that with the sort of comprehensive?
computations that the market allows and of course the answer to that is we have political
Discussions about it all the time that are untrammeled so that we can adjust the ratio between those two things as necessary so again
That's a that's a read. That's a argument on the side of free speech
Yeah, I mean you know really it couldn't be more important the real answer is that both failures are frightening, right?
I mean you really don't want a state
Nannying you and over regulating the market and taking the magic out of it
And you don't want the completely unregulated
Landscape where the market you know
Starts probing the minds of your children and figuring out how to sell them things that they don't have any
Ability to resist right you need to figure out what that path is and it's not easy
but you can't do it in a landscape where you can't talk about the